---
layout: page
title: Overview
permalink: '/overview/'
---

### Project Rationale ###

The project’s purpose is to understand the foundational role of melodrama in shaping aesthetic experience during the Romantic period. Its empirical focus will be the exhaustive documentation and detailed analysis of performances of melodrama in the first decades of its popularity. This site will make available--in curated, searchable form--data that is currently either
scattered or inaccessible to researchers.

Emerging in the 1790s from the theatre of revolutionary France and popular gothic drama in Britain, melodrama is at once central to romanticism and a creature of it. Its origins and popular ascent, its trafficking in speed and sensation, coincide with the years of the Napoleonic Wars and their aftermath. As Jeffrey Cox has recently argued, melodrama's penchant for providing thrilling resolutions to stories of danger and doom cannot be fully understood outside of romanticism's dominant context of nearly continuous and total war. Even Thomas Holcroft's A Tale of Mystery (1802), an adaptation of Pixérécourt's Coelina and the first ‘melo drame’ so-called in English, was only made possible when the brief Peace of Amiens (1802-3) allowed Holcroft to slip across the Channel to Paris, where he cribbed the Coelina's music, staging, and book during a week of intensive viewing. The hit of the 1802-3 season, A Tale of Mystery inspired further plays. Forty-eight plays calling themselves melodramas were submitted to the Lord Chamberlain's office for review between 1803 and 1813. Unlike the formulaic versions of the later nineteenth century, these were heterogeneous and varied, drawing for their stories and styles on a range of dramaturgies including pantomime, opera, and ballet. What they all shared was what Samuel Coleridge called ‘situations’: scenes of tension and suspense aided by movement and music expressive of plot. Audiences found the experience utterly new: a theatre of sensation providing a kind of heightened realism, in which the senses and the heart could be entirely engaged. 

This combination of sensation and affective experience, accompanied by a continuous, expressive score, quickly became dominant not just in self-proclaimed melodramas but also in other theatrical genres. Between 1813 and 1823, the number of melodramas nearly tripled as longstanding theatrical genres like comedy, burlesque, and opera were refitted to this newly popular, all-consuming mode. A cartoon originally published by The Satirist in 1807--of a many-headed monster trampling the plays of elder dramatists as theatre shareholders suckle at its teats--was quickly redubbed ‘The Monster Melodrama’ in subsequent reprintings. This chimerical creature, reassembled from the dismembered limbs of older theatrical forms, condemned melodrama for its hybridity; melodrama's monstrosity arises out of its willingness to combine an unsettling range of aesthetic practices to create a new experience. Writing of Matthew Lewis's new melodrama Timour the Tartar (1811), a reviewer for The Dramatic Censor signing his name ‘Oliver Old Times’ complains of being ‘kept broad awake’ during the performance ‘by the bray of kettle drums, the galloping of horses, and the clangour of the trumpets’. Horrified by this ‘phenomenon of bad taste’, he concludes ‘We are becoming a warlike people, Mr. Editor ... and what before [we] would have turned from in disgust, [we] now contemplate with pleasure’. What such accounts make clear is that melodrama was
indeed a ‘phenomenon’, its combination of sound, score, and special effects reflecting romanticism’s changing acoustic world and affective sensibilities. 

### The Database ###

British theatre historians for the past half-century have depended on a resource called The London Stage 1660-1800 for much of our theatrical data. Providing dates, cast lists, returns, and snippets from reviews, its eleven volumes are invaluable and have inevitably shaped subsequent research. As its title suggests, The London Stage 1660-1800 cuts off just as melodrama is beginning; its focus on London’s major theatres (Drury Lane, Covent Garden, the Haymarket, and the King’s Theatre) necessarily excludes Britain’s provincial stages and the many minor, ‘illegitimate’ houses scattered over the metropole. For information about these
performances, researchers must comb newspapers and collections of playbills, making it a Herculean labor even to amass foundational data for a study. This project will make two kinds of information newly available to researchers:

• A richly-tagged, searchable database of every recorded performance and mention of melodrama in Britain between 1793 (the year of George Colman’s 'musical drama' The Mountaineers) and 1843 (the year of the Theatre Regulation Act);

• Curated Optical Character Recognition (OCR) data of at least 100,000 playbills, and of significantly higher quality than that currently available.

### Collections ###

Sparsely catalogued and difficult to synthesize, playbill collections are notoriously underutilised. At the centre of the “Romantic Melodrama” project is the British Library collection of playbills, which chroniclesLondon and provincial performances from roughly 1780 to 1860. Four years ago these were made available digitally, though in unwieldy pdf files with high word-level reading error rates of over 40%. Although still incredibly useful, the collection, as it is currently digitised, is an imperfect finding aid; one can search for a given performance, actor, or keyword, but with no assurance that the results will be reliable or representative. Our team has recast the OCR for the entire British Library collection of 90,000 playbills using tools incorporating neural language models as well as traditional character recognition. This new process has lowered the word error rate to 8%, a result which will greatly facilitate data collection. This improved OCR provides the foundation for this project's research.

Melodrama presents a rare opportunity to researchers of nineteenth-century culture interested not just in the emergence and proliferation of genres, but also in the networks that facilitate the evolution of cultural forms. Residing in staged performance yet producing a host of printed traces, melodrama reveals cultural relations otherwise invisible to literary historians. 

